## Sample and control naming recommendations  

Using the naming scheme below is not necessary to run the pipeline. However, we strongly recommend (re)coding samples and controls accordingly as this will make the interpretation of the diagnostics straightforward.

Sample & Control Type should be defined/highlighted like the following 
- only alphanumeric signs, no _ or other special characters recommended!
- Samples: three letters (a-zA-Z) & project year: e.g. SED22,
  - if you have different projects it makes sense to name them differently and start the belonging controls with the first letter of the project.
- Controls: one letter(a-zA-Z) & project year & Control abbreviation: e.g. S22PN

Double underscores are only allowed and necessary to separate primer name and replicate name. Simple underscores are used to separate information in the names. See the following example:

| SampleID               | Description                             |
| ---                    | ---                                     |
| SED22_0001_R01         | Sample_SampleNo_ReplicateNo             |
| S22PN_0001_P01         | ControlType_SampleNo_PlateNo            |
| Euka02__SED22_0001_R01 | Primer__Sample_SampleNo_ReplicateNo     |
| Euka02__S22PN_0001_P01 | Primer__ControlType_SampleNo_PlateNo    |

### Naming pattern for the controls:

Tab.1: Overview the control types separating into positive (DNA present) or negative (ideally lacking of DNA) controls and the recommended control abbreviations.
|          | Control Type                | Control Abbreviation |
| :---     | :---                        | :---                 |
| Negative | Field Negative Control      | FN                   |
|          | Extraction Negative Control | EN                   |
|          | PCR Negative Control        | PN                   |
|          | Multiplexing Control        | MN                   |
| Positive | Field Positive Control      | FP                   |
|          | Extraction Positive Control | EP                   |
|          | PCR Positive Control        | PP                   |

### Control type description  

_Field negative controls_ are frequently generated by extracting DNA from storage/extraction buffers brought into the field, or distilled water used to clean specimen collection devices (Zinger et al., 2019).

_Extraction negative controls_ are generated during DNA extraction, without adding a sample (DNA source). Aim is to identify contamination occurring during DNA extraction. Extraction negatives are handled as a regular sample, meaning they are amplified and sequenced as normal DNA extracts (Taberlet et al., 2018) . 

_PCR negative controls_ are PCR reactions set up without a DNA template. Instead of adding extracted DNA (true sample or extraction control), purified water is added to the PCR mixture (Taberlet et al., 2018). The water should be the water also used to dilute the DNA extracts (in case extracts are diluted).

_Multiplexing (negative) controls_ (also referred to as “Tagging system control“, (Taberlet et al., 2018) are wells left completely empty on plates during PCR setup. There are no primers, no template, and generally no reagents added to these wells. They are highly important if combinatorial indexing (sample identity is coded by the unique combination of a forward  and reverse tag) is used to identify PCR reactions . Multiplexing controls allow the detection of index jumps during library preparation or sequencing (Schnell et al., 2015).

_Field positive controls_ are sometimes used in conservation projects of invasive species. It refers to positive controls e.g. of streams or harbors where it is known that an invasive species exists  (Gargan et al., 2022). 

_Extraction positive controls_ are samples known to yield DNA of desired quality with the applied extraction method (Elbrecht and Steinke, 2019). DNA spiked into unextracted templates may also act as extraction control (Elbrecht and Steinke, 2019; Iwaszkiewicz-Eggebrecht et al., 2024) .

_PCR positive controls_ are DNA extracts of a mock community (Taberlet et al., 2018). The mock community allows early control of PCR success and it should not include species expected in the samples.

## References

- Elbrecht, V., Steinke, D., 2019. Scaling up DNA metabarcoding for freshwater macrozoobenthos monitoring. Freshw. Biol. 64, 380–387. https://doi.org/10.1111/fwb.13220
- Gargan, L.M., Brooks, P.R., Vye, S.R., Ironside, J.E., Jenkins, S.R., Crowe, T.P., Carlsson, J., 2022. The use of environmental DNA metabarcoding and quantitative PCR for molecular detection of marine invasive non-native species associated with artificial structures. Biol. Invasions 24, 635–648. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10530-021-02672-8
- Iwaszkiewicz-Eggebrecht, E., Zizka, V., Lynggaard, C., 2024. Three steps towards comparability and standardization among molecular methods for characterizing insect communities. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 379, 20230118. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2023.0118
- Schnell, I.B., Bohmann, K., Gilbert, M.T.P., 2015. Tag jumps illuminated – reducing sequence‐to‐sample misidentifications in metabarcoding studies. Mol. Ecol. Resour. 15, 1289–1303. https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-0998.12402
- Taberlet, P., Bonin, A., Zinger, L., Coissac, E., 2018. Environmental DNA: For Biodiversity Research and Monitoring. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198767220.001.0001  
- Zinger, L., Bonin, A., Alsos, I.G., Bálint, M., Bik, H., Boyer, F., Chariton, A.A., Creer, S., Coissac, E., Deagle, B.E., De Barba, M., Dickie, I.A., Dumbrell, A.J., Ficetola, G.F., Fierer, N., Fumagalli, L., Gilbert, M.T.P., Jarman, S., Jumpponen, A., Kauserud, H., Orlando, L., Pansu, J., Pawlowski, J., Tedersoo, L., Thomsen, P.F., Willerslev, E., Taberlet, P., 2019. DNA metabarcoding—Need for robust experimental designs to draw sound ecological conclusions. Mol. Ecol. 28, 1857–1862. https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.15060
